feat(docs): revamp of the functions page (#3076)
tact-lang/tact: docs/src/content/docs/book/functions.mdx

```tact
contract FeaturelessWallet(publicKey: Int as uint256) {
    external(msg: MessageWithSignedData) {
        // Can't be replied to as there's no sender!
        // Thus, many checks are required.
        throwUnless(35, msg.bundle.verifySignature(self.publicKey));
    }
}

message MessageWithSignedData {
    bundle: SignedBundle;
    walletId: Int as int32;
    seqno: Int as uint32;
}
```

Read more about them on their dedicated page: [External messages](/book/external).

## `fun` — regular functions {#fun}

<Badge text="Any scope" title="These functions can be declared or defined within contracts and at the top level" variant="note" size="medium"/><p/>

Regular functions are defined using the `fun{:tact}` keyword.

```tact
fun add(a: Int, b: Int): Int {
    return a + b;
}
```

Read about common aspects of functions: [Commonalities](#commonalities).

### Global functions {#fun-global}

<Badge text="Global scope" variant="note" size="medium"/><p/>

Regular functions that can be defined only at the top (module) level are called global. They differ from [internal functions](#fun-internal) not only in the scope, but also in available [attributes](#attributes).

```tact

> fun customPow(a: Int, c: Int): Int {

Reviewer: let's provide a more domain specific example, or at least less naive

These attributes _cannot_ be specified:

* [`abstract{:tact}`](#attributes-abstract), [`virtual{:tact}`](#attributes-virtual) and [`override{:tact}`](#attributes-override) — global functions cannot be defined within a contract or a trait.
* [`get{:tact}`](#attributes-get) — global functions cannot be [getters](#get).

### Internal functions {#fun-internal}

<Badge text="Contract scope" variant="note" size="medium"/><p/>

These functions behave similarly to private methods in popular object-oriented languages — they are internal to contracts and can be called by prefixing their names with a special [identifier `self{:tact}`](/book/contracts#self). That is why internal (or member) functions are sometimes referred to as "contract methods".

Internal functions can access the contract's [persistent state variables](/book/contracts#variables) and [constants](/book/contracts#constants).

They can only be called from [receivers](#receivers), [getters](#get), and other internal functions, but not from other contracts.

```tact
contract InternalFun() {
    fun add(a: Int, b: Int): Int {

>         return a + b;

Reviewer: let's make this function use a contract parameter, so `self` actually makes sense below

    }
    get fun compute() {
        self.add(2, 2); // 4
    }
}
```

The following attributes can be specified for internal functions with no prior attributes:

* [`inline{:tact}`](#attributes-inline) — embeds the function contents at the call site.
* [`abstract{:tact}`](#attributes-abstract), [`virtual{:tact}`](#attributes-virtual) and [`override{:tact}`](#attributes-override) — function [inheritance](#inheritance).
* [`get{:tact}`](#attributes-get) — internal functions can become [getters](#get).

These attributes _cannot_ be specified:

* [`extends{:tact}`](#attributes-extends) — internal function cannot become an [extension function](#extends).
* [`mutates{:tact}`](#attributes-mutates) — internal function cannot become an [extension mutation function](#mutates).

## `extends` — extension functions {#extends}

<Badge text="Global scope" variant="note" size="medium"/><p/>

To define an extension function, add an `extends{:tact}` attribute to any [global function](#fun-global) and name its first parameter as `self`. The type of `self` is the type that is being extended by the extension function.

```tact

> extends fun customPow(self: Int, exp: Int): Int {

Reviewer: better example is needed

fun add(self: Int, other: Int): Int {
    //  ~~~~~~~~~
    return self + other;
}
```

The following additional attributes can be specified:

* [`inline{:tact}`](#attributes-inline) — embeds the function contents at the call site.
* [`mutates{:tact}`](#attributes-mutates) — makes it into an [extension mutation function](#attributes-mutates).

These attributes _cannot_ be specified:

* [`abstract{:tact}`](#attributes-abstract), [`virtual{:tact}`](#attributes-virtual) and [`override{:tact}`](#attributes-override) — extension functions cannot be defined within a contract or a trait.
* [`get{:tact}`](#attributes-get) — extension functions cannot become [getters](#get).

## `mutates` — extension mutation functions {#mutates}

<Badge text="Global scope" variant="note" size="medium"/><p/>

The extension _mutation_ functions replace the value of the extended type with the new one at the end of its execution. That value would change only upon the assignment to `self{:tact}` within the function body.

To define an extension mutation function, add a `mutates{:tact}` attribute to the existing [extension function](#extends).

```tact

> extends mutates fun customPow(self: Int, exp: Int) {

Reviewer: better example

---
title: Functions
description: "Global, asm, native functions, as well as receivers, getters, and member functions, plus the many attributes that allow for great flexibility and expressivity in the Tact language"
---

import { Badge } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

Tact offers a diverse set of function kinds and attributes that provide great flexibility and expressivity. The Tact functions can be generally divided into two categories:

* [Primary](#primary), which constitute the backbone and the API of the contract

> * [Complementary](#complementary), which serve as helper building blocks for reusable and maintainable contracts.

Reviewer: please do not make this classification one more level deep, let's keep the previous one

Author: Hmm, but that's kinda the point — to not mix all kinds of things together and have a clear primary-complementary separation.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/540640db-8c13-424c-9072-1b7bf26e6bd0)

Do you insist? :)

Reviewer: I do. I don't get this separation at all

Author: Ok

}
```

## Primary

Primary functions form the interface of your contract, defining how it interacts with the blockchain and external systems. [Getters](#get) can be directly called from outside the blockchain, while receivers handle incoming messages from other contracts ([`receive(){:tact}`](#receive)), messages sent from off-chain ([`external(){:tact}`](#external)) or messages bounced back to the contract that sent them due to some issues on the recipients side ([`bounced(){:tact}`](#bounced)).

### `receive` — internal message receivers {#receive}

<Badge text="Contract scope" variant="note" size="medium"/><p/>

Receiver functions are special functions responsible for receiving messages in contracts and can be defined only within a contract or trait.

```tact
contract Counter(counter: Int) {
    // This means that this contract can receive the comment "Increment", and this function would be called for such messages

>     receive("Increment") {

Reviewer: do not use text receivers

```tact
contract Bouncy() {
    // Handles empty message bodies
    receive() {
        // Sending a message...
        message(MessageParameters{
            to: sender(),
            value: ton("0.1"),
            body: BB {}.toCell(), // ...with a BB message body
        });
    }

    // If the BB message body wasn't successfully processed by the recipient,
    // it can bounce back to our contract, in which case the following receiver
    // will handle it.
    bounced(msg: bounced<BB>) {
        // ...
    }
}

message BB {}
```

Read more about them on their dedicated page: [Bounced messages](/book/bounced).

### `external` — external message receivers {#external}

<Badge text="Contract scope" variant="note" size="medium"/><p/>

The `external(){:tact}` is a special kind of receivers which handle external messages — they are sent from the off-chain world and do not have a sender address on the blockchain. Such messages are often sent to wallet contracts to process specific messages or simply to send funds to another wallet contract.

```tact
contract E() {

>     external("hello, it's me") {

Reviewer: not text receivers

        // Can't be replied to as there's no sender!
    }
}
```

Read more about them on their dedicated page: [External messages](/book/external).

> ### `get fun` — offchain getter functions {#get}

Reviewer: let's also add:
- getters can modify the contract state variables, but the modification is not-persistent;
- need an example of a getter with parameters;
- getters do not consume gas from the contract's balance;
- there is a gas limit for getters (@Shvandre mentioned it depends on an API provider);
- `method_id` is not only useful for collision resolution but also to ensure the correct interface (the case of Jettons);
- use different examples: borrow from Jettons or our benchmarks;
- we can provide an example of returning the whole state of the contract without listing all the contract fields;
- getters cannot be `asm` functions;
- getters can be used as contract methods: for instance, receivers can call the methods of the contract they belong to;
- check issue #2573, if it has more things to cover.

Author: Done! This PR is already huge, so if there are any getter-related spots that I've missed, let's cover them in separate, smaller issue-PR pairs.

Sometimes, getters with different names end up with the same method ID. If this happens, you can either rename some of the getters or manually specify the method ID as a [compile-time](/ref/core-comptime) expression like so:

```tact
contract ManualMethodId {
    const methodId: Int = 16384 + 42;

    get(self.methodId)
    fun methodId1(): Int {
        return self.methodId;
    }

    get(crc32("crc32") + 42 & 0x3ffff | 0x4000)
    fun methodId2(): Int {
        return crc32("crc32") + 42 & 0x3ffff | 0x4000;
    }
}
```

Unlike getters, method IDs for [member functions](/book/contracts#internal-functions) and some special functions are obtained sequentially: integers in the inclusive range from -4 to 0 are given to [certain message handlers](https://docs.ton.org/v3/documentation/smart-contracts/func/docs/functions#special-function-names), while member functions are numbered with method IDs starting at $1$ and going up to $2^{14} - 1$ inclusive.

> Since method IDs are 19-bit signed integers and some of them are reserved, only the inclusive ranges from $-2^{18}$ to $-5$ and from $2^{14}$ to $2^{18} - 1$ are free to be used by users. To avoid collisions, it is recommended to specify method IDs only in these ranges, avoiding the method IDs of Tact-specific getters mentioned above.

Reviewer 2: If I understand correctly, according to algorithm above, get methods ids can't be negative, so specifying negative ids explicitly looks kinda confusing

Author: Method IDs can be negative if specified directly. This is a valid contract:

```tact
contract Example() {
    get(-100) fun antipositive(): Int { return -100 }
}
```

And in its respective Fift code there is the following declaration:

```fift
PROGRAM{
   // ...
  -100 DECLMETHOD %antipositive
  // ...
```

So yeah, perhaps a note about algorithm vs. manual is needed.

}
```

#### Member functions {#fun-member}

<Badge text="Contract scope" variant="note" size="medium"/><p/>

These functions behave similarly to private methods in popular object-oriented languages — they're internal to contracts and can be called by prefixing them with a special [identifier `self{:tact}`](/book/contracts#self). That's why member functions are sometimes referred to as "contract methods".

Member functions can access the contract's [persistent state variables](/book/contracts#variables) and [constants](/book/contracts#constants).

They can only be called from [receivers](#receive), [getters](#get), and other member functions, but not from other contracts.

> ### `init` — constructor function {#init}

Reviewer: To better explain `init`, add an example with contract parameters (including an `initialized: Bool` flag) and show how `init` can be simulated. This can be done using the Counter contract and its two equivalent implementations using contract fields and contract parameters.

The `inline{:tact}` attribute embeds the code of the function to its call sites, which eliminates the overhead of the calls but potentially increases the code size if the function is called from multiple places.

This attribute can improve performance of large infrequently called functions or small, alias-like functions. It can be combined with any other attribute except for [`get{:tact}`](#attributes-get).

```tact
inline fun add(a: Int, b: Int) {
    // The following addition will be performed in-place,
    // at all the `add()` call sites.
    return a + b;
}
```

#### `get` {#attributes-get}

<Badge text="Contract scope" variant="note" size="medium"/><p/>

The `get{:tact}` attribute is a special attribute that cannot be combined with any other attribute. It is applied to [member functions], transforming them into [getter functions](#get).

## Low-level representation

On [TVM][tvm] level, contracts and their functions are often represented as a dictionary (map) of methods, from their numeric method IDs to their respective bodies composed of TVM instructions. Each function then is a method that transforms the stack and TVM registers.

> A function call is really a call into that dictionary under that functions ID, after which:

Reviewer 2: This sentence sounds overcomplicated, what about something like:

`A function call is essentially a call into the dictionary using the function’s ID`

Effectively, the behavior or `init(){:tact}` function can be simulated when using contract parameters instead — through adding a special [`Bool{:tact}`](/book/types#booleans) field and a function that would be used in place of the `init(){:tact}`. That function would be called at the beginning of every receiver, while the boolean field would be used as a flag.

```tact
contract CounterBuiltinInit {
    // Persistent state variables
    counter: Int as uint32;

    // Constructor function, which is run only once
    init() {
        self.counter = 0;
    }

    receive() {
        cashback(sender());
    }

    receive(_: Increment) {
        self.counter += 1;
    }

    get fun counter(): Int {
        return self.counter;
    }
}

contract CounterDIYInit(
    // Persistent state variables
    initialized: Bool, // set this field to `false` during deployment

>     counter: Int as uint32, // set this field to `0` during deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    counter: Int as uint32, // during deployment the value of this field does not matter
```

) {
    // Internal function, which will be used in place of a pseudo-constructor function

>     fun init() {

Reviewer: let's use some other name: this should also fix syntax highlighting and make it more obvious it's not a builtin construction

        // that can be used for deployments.
        self.init();
        self.counter += 1;
    }

    get fun counter(): Int {
        return self.counter;
    }

}

message Increment {}
```

None of the [attributes](#attributes) can be specified for the `init(){:tact}` function.

Read more about the `init(){:tact}` on its dedicated section: [Constructor function `init(){:tact}`](/book/contracts#init-function).

## `native` — foreign function interfaces {#native}

<Badge text="Global scope" variant="note" size="medium"/><p/>

Native functions are Tact's [FFI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_function_interface) to FunC — they allow direct bindings to imported FunC functions. In order to declare them, you have to import a `.fc` or `.func` file first. Granted, the FunC's [standard library file, `stdlib.fc`](https://github.com/tact-lang/tact/blob/main/src/stdlib/stdlib/std/stdlib.fc), is always imported for you.

Consider the following FunC function:

```func title="import_me.fc"
;; Notice the tensor return type (int, int),
;; which means we would have to define at least one
;; Tact structure to bind to this function.

> (int, int) minmax(int a, int b) {

Reviewer: this is not a very good implementation of a 2-element sorting function: most likely, FunC won't optimize it to that single TVM which it corresponds to

Reviewer: and since it can be implemented as an `asm` function in Tact, a better example would be to use some function from the `mathlib.fc` library (something about fixed-point arithmetic, for instance)

Author: I've browsed through the `mathlib.fc`, and things written there can be done in Tact via regular or `asm` functions. However, there are things that are simply cannot be expressed in Tact yet, such as parametric polymorphism with `forall`.

```func
forall X -> (X, ()) ~impure_touch(X x) impure asm "NOP";
```

UPD: I totally forgot that the minmax example showed how to use structures. Searching for a suitable example...
UPD2: It's very tough to find a simple example that returns multiple values without resorting to asm. I actually want to keep the `minmax()` here, if possible.

Ok, I went with an asm function with HASHEXT_KECCAK512, just to show the mapping of Tact structures to FunC tuples.

//            which can be the identical to its FunC counterpart

// 3. Define the necessary structs for the bind.
//    In our case, it is the MinMax structure to capture multiple return values.
struct MinMax {
    min: Int;
    max: Int;
}

// 4. Use the function whenever you would like.
//    It has the same properties as regular global functions.
fun example() {
    let res = minmax(20, 10);
    res.min; // 10
    res.max; // 20
}
```

The following attributes can be specified for `native{:tact}` functions:

* [`inline{:tact}`](#attributes-inline) — embeds the function contents at the call site.
* [`extends{:tact}`](#attributes-extends) — makes it an [extension function](#extends).
* [`mutates{:tact}`](#attributes-mutates), along with [`extends{:tact}`](#attributes-extends) — makes it an [extension mutation function](#mutates).

These attributes _cannot_ be specified:

* [`abstract{:tact}`](#attributes-abstract), [`virtual{:tact}`](#attributes-virtual) and [`override{:tact}`](#attributes-override) — native functions cannot be defined within a contract or a trait.
* [`get{:tact}`](#attributes-get) — native functions cannot be [getters](#get).

> ## `asm` — assembly functions {#asm}

Reviewer: a simple example of an `asm` function is needed here, just to illustrate what it looks like

In particular, all functions of the trait become accessible in the contract, regardless of any inheritance-related attributes, such as `abstract{:tact}`, `virtual{:tact}`, or `override{:tact}`.

You can allow a contract inheriting a [trait][trait] to modify a [internal function](#fun-internal) marked with the `virtual{:tact}` keyword by using `override{:tact}`. A function can also be marked as `abstract{:tact}`, in which case the inheriting contract must define its implementation.

```tact
trait FilterTrait with Ownable {
    // Virtual functions can be overridden by users of this trait
    virtual fun filterMessage(): Bool {
        return sender() != self.owner;
    }

    abstract fun specialFilter(): Bool;

    // Receivers can be inherited, but cannot be overridden
    receive() { cashback(sender()) }
}

contract Filter() with FilterTrait {
    // Overriding the default behavior of the FilterTrait
    override fun filterMessage(): Bool {
        return true;
    }

    override fun specialFilter(): Bool {
        return true;
    }
}
```

> {/* TODO: inheritance table as per https://github.com/tact-lang/tact/issues/3030 */}

Reviewer: this comment is visible in the rendered text

Author: No, it's not — the `{/* ... */}` are `.mdx` comments, and we have a couple of those ones on some other pages

#### `abstract` {#attributes-abstract}

<Badge text="Contract scope" title="This attribute can be applied to internal functions only" variant="note" size="medium"/><p/>

The `abstract{:tact}` attribute allows declaring a [internal function](#fun-internal) with no body given at declaration. Functions with this attribute are meant to be overridden later in the inheritance hierarchy by either an intermediate trait or the contract inheriting it.

```tact
trait BlackSquare {
    abstract fun paint();
}

trait CompositionVII {
    abstract fun paintedWithOil(preliminary: Bool): Bool;
}

> contract Abstractionism() with BlackSquare, CompositionVII {

Reviewer: I appreciate the cultural references, but let's not do it here

we are building a DSL to handle finances, so let's keep our examples practical and definitely no string here (they are very gas expensive)

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/21e69139-ca29-469e-b5e9-a02fbf49c7d7)

Therefore, there are no modifications of the original values in different scopes, except for the [extension _mutation_ functions](#attributes-mutates). And even so, those functions do not mutate the original value denoted by the `self{:tact}` keyword — instead, they discard the old value and replace it with the new one obtained at the end of the function body.

The above applies to all functions except for [receivers](#receivers), because they cannot be called directly and are only executed upon receiving specific messages.

### Scope {#commonalities-scope}

All kinds of functions vary in scope: some can only be defined at the top level, such as [global functions](#fun-global), while others can only be defined within contracts and traits, such as [internal functions](#fun-internal) or [receivers](#receivers).

> Functions are hoisted upon declaration, such that the ones declared earlier might call those declared later and vice versa.

Reviewer: Two more clarifications are needed:
- static functions or internal contract functions cannot share identifiers
- extension functions can have the same identifiers, provided the types of the `self` parameters are different

Author: +1:
• names of internals and getters do not conflict with contract variables/fields. Or rather that they are in different namespaces, so "you" can name them the same for convenience, especially in the getters' case.

```tact
// Global function first() is defined prior to the second() function,
// but we can call the second() one just fine.
fun first(): Bool {
    return second(true); // always true
}

// Global function second() is defined after the first() function,
// and call to the first() function works as expected.
fun second(flag: Bool): Bool {
    if (flag) {
        return true;
    }
    return first(); // always true, because of the prior condition
}
```

> ### Return values {#commonalities-return}

Reviewer: Link to the explanation that it should be obvious to the compiler that returns are always reachable

        cashback(sender());
    }
}
```

To return multiple values in a function, aggregate the values in a [struct][struct].

```tact
fun minmax(a: Int, b: Int): MinMax {
    if (a < b) {
        return MinMax { min: a, max: b };
    }
    return MinMax { min: b, max: a };
}

struct MinMax {
    min: Int;
    max: Int;
}
```

### Recursion {#commonalities-recursion}

Recursive functions are allowed, including the mutually recursive functions. There is no upper limit on the recursion depth or the number of calls — computations will continue until there is no more gas to spend.

```tact
fun produceOneFrom(a: Int): Int {
    if (a <= 1) { return 1 }
    return alsoProduceOneFrom(a - 1);
}

fun alsoProduceOneFrom(b: Int): Int {
    if (b <= 1) { return 1 }
    return produceOneFrom(b - 1);
}

fun example(someA: Int, someB: Int) {
    // This sum will always be 2, regardless of values of `someA` and `someB`.
    // The only exception is when their values are too big and there is not
    // enough gas to finish the computations, in which case the transaction
    // will fail with an exit code -14: Out of gas error.
    produceOneFrom(someA) + alsoProduceOneFrom(someB); // 2
}
```

> ### Trailing comma {#commonalities-comma}

Reviewer: and trailing semi-colon

Author: Oh, yeah
